
PROJECT DOCUMENTATION
1. Project Title:
📘 AGRISMART FARMERS SYSTEM –
MERN Stack Web Application

2. Developer
Phillip kimonyi, student plp, 2025 cohort

3. Abstract

The Smart Farmers System is a MERN (MongoDB, Express.js, React.js, Node.js) full-stack application that connects farmers and buyers, allowing farmers to upload agricultural products and buyers to browse and purchase them. The project implements user roles (Admin, Farmer, Buyer), authentication using Clerk, and dynamic product aggregation with secure backend APIs.
The system was designed following the Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC) including planning, analysis, design, development, testing, deployment, and maintenance.
The project demonstrates clean architecture, modern UI, and real-world system modularity.

4. Introduction
Agriculture is one of the biggest sectors in Kenya. However, lack of market linkage between farmers and buyers leads to wastage, losses, and inefficiency.
The Smart Farmers System solves this by providing an online marketplace for farmers and buyers.

The system is:

Fast
Fully authenticated
Role-based
Secure with protected routes
Deployable and scalable
5. System Overview / Methodology (SDLC)
5.1 Planning
We defined:
Users: Admin, Farmers, Buyers
Need: A digital marketplace
Core features:
⦁	User authentication (Clerk)
⦁	Product uploading (farmer)
⦁	Product browsing (buyer)
⦁	Admin management

Product categories
Dashboards
CRUD operations
Deployment plan: Cloud (vercel + Render)
5.2 System Analysis
User Requirements
Farmers
1.	Add, edit, delete products
2.	View own dashboard

Buyers
1.	Browse categories
2.	View products
3.	Add to cart (optional future feature)
Admin
1.	Manage all users
2.	Manage all products
High-level overview

Technical Requirements
⦁	MERN stack
⦁	REST APIs
⦁	Clerk authentication
⦁	MongoDB role assignment
⦁	React Router for navigation
⦁	Responsive UI

5.3 System Design
5.3.1 Architecture Diagram

Frontend: React (components, routes, context)
Backend: Node.js + Express.js
Database: MongoDB
Auth: Clerk.com
Cloud Storage: Unsplash links for product thumbnails(to update upload from local device)

5.3.2 ER Diagram

Entities:
User
Product
Category
Relationships:

User (1) → Products (Many)
Category (1) → Products (Many)
5.3.3 API Design

Endpoints:
POST /api/products
GET /api/products
GET /api/products/:id
PUT /api/products/:id
DELETE /api/products/:id

6. Components
Backend
i.	Express server
ii.	Mongoose models
iii.	Product routes
iv.	User role middleware
v.	Admin authorization

Frontend
i.	React components
ii.	Product UI cards
iii.	Login, Signup, Dashboard pages
iv.	Navbar, Footer
v.	Category pages
vi.	Admin dashboard
vii.	Authentication
viii.	Clerk

Role stored in MongoDB metadata collection

Protected routes using Clerk + custom middleware

7. Project Design
7.1 UI/UX
Designed in Figma → Implemented in React
Clean grey theme
Simple navigation
Consistent spacing
Card-based product grid

7.2 System Flowchart



8. Functional Code Summary
8.1 Models
Product Model
⦁	name
⦁	category
⦁	price
⦁	description
⦁	image
⦁	ownerId
⦁	createdAt

8.2 Controllers
⦁	addProduct()
⦁	getAllProducts()
⦁	updateProduct()
⦁	deleteProduct()
⦁	getProductByCategory()

8.3 Frontend Code
⦁	React Router for pages
⦁	Axios for backend requests
⦁	Clerk components for login/signup
⦁	Conditional rendering for dashboards

9. How The System Works
1. User Signup/Login through Clerk
2. Clerk assigns user ID
3. MongoDB stores role (admin/farmer/buyer)
4. Farmer uploads product
5. Product saved in MongoDB
6. Buyer views categories
7. Buyer selects and views products
8. Admin monitors all activity
10. Results & Observations

✔ System works smoothly
✔ Admin role validated using MongoDB role field
✔ Products displayed correctly by category
✔ UI clean and responsive
✔ Clerk authentication stable after metadata fix

11. Challenges Faced

Clerk metadata not updating → solved by storing role in MongoDB
CORS issues during deployment
Routing issues on vercel and render
Image hosting → solved using Unsplash links
Maintaining admin-only route security

12. Conclusion

The Smart Farmers System successfully demonstrates:
Full MERN development
Authentication and authorization
Database modeling
REST API creation
SDLC-based project execution
Clean UI/UX principles

This project has been deployed and is up and running deployable and scalable, and serves as a strong portfolio example for real-world full-stack development.